EXECUTION LIMITS AND ROLLBACK SCOPE
===================================

Purpose
-------

This note records limitations of the guarded plan/approve/execute workflow that
remain after adding approval-bound read-only context repositories and target
write-path --allow/--deny patterns. It is a design reference for future work,
not an authorization to change executor behavior.


Current command flow
--------------------

The normal human workflow remains:

  orchestrate plan "describe the change" \
    --allow '**' \
    --deny 'infra/**' \
    --deny '.github/**'

  orchestrate approve --latest
  orchestrate execute --latest --print-only
  orchestrate execute --latest                    # Codex (default)

To use Claude instead for the real execution:

  orchestrate execute --latest --executor claude

The human must choose one real executor command. Approval is single-use.


Executor switching
------------------

An executor cannot be hot-swapped during a running execution session. The
approval is consumed immediately before the executor is launched, even if the
executor later fails, is interrupted, or produces no changes.

To switch executors after launch:

1. Stop the current executor safely.
2. Inspect the target repository and preserve all existing changes.
3. Create a new plan from the resulting working-tree state.
4. Review and approve the new plan.
5. Start the other executor with the new approval.

Existing uncommitted changes remain on disk and become part of the new plan's
starting working-tree fingerprint. Never clean, reset, restore, overwrite, or
discard them without first identifying their owner and obtaining explicit human
authorization.


Target-repository write scope
-----------------------------

--allow grants target-repository write scope. --deny subtracts from that scope
and always wins when both patterns match. These patterns do not restrict reads.

For Codex:

- The native workspace-write sandbox limits writes to the target workspace but
  does not enforce individual --allow/--deny patterns inside that workspace.
- Codex receives the approved paths in its prompt.
- After Codex exits, deterministic Python validation compares Git-visible
  changes with the allowed and denied patterns.
- A denied or out-of-scope write is therefore detected after it has already
  reached the real working tree.

For Claude:

- Target --deny patterns are translated into invocation-local Edit/Write denial
  rules and sandbox denyWrite entries.
- Those rules are intended to block matching writes before they occur.
- The same post-execution Git-visible validation still runs as a second layer.
- Pre-write enforcement depends on the installed Claude CLI and sandbox honoring
  the generated rules; it does not remove the need for final validation.

For approval-bound --add-dir context repositories:

- They are read-only context, never additional write targets.
- Codex does not receive them as additional writable directories.
- Claude receives repository-wide Edit/Write and sandbox write denials.
- Their Git and policy state is checked before approval and execution, and their
  repository snapshot is checked again after execution.


Git-visible detection gap
-------------------------

Target scope validation is based on Git status and metadata for Git-visible
dirty paths. A file ignored by Git may not appear in that inventory. For
example, an ignored local settings file, generated directory, or build output
could be modified without the current target validator reporting it.

This gap does not authorize access to environment files, credentials, private
keys, Terraform state, vault data, or other secret material. Those remain
prohibited context. It means only that Git status is not a complete filesystem
change detector.


Rollback behavior
-----------------

The orchestrator does not automatically roll back a failed executor or a scope
violation. Automatic Git restore/reset/clean operations could destroy unrelated
human work, including changes that existed before execution.

If validation fails:

- The command reports the violation and exits unsuccessfully.
- The approval remains consumed.
- Changes made in the real target working tree remain present.
- The human must inspect git status, the final diff, untracked files, and any
  relevant ignored outputs before deciding what should be retained or repaired.
- Recovery must be targeted and ownership-aware. Do not use broad destructive
  Git commands as a generic recovery procedure.
- Any continuation or executor switch requires a new plan and approval based on
  the repository's current state.


Proposed complete fix: isolated execution and controlled promotion
------------------------------------------------------------------

The preferred future design is to prevent executor changes from reaching the
real working tree until the complete result validates:

  approved target state
          |
          v
  disposable isolated workspace
          |
          v
  run Codex or Claude in isolation
          |
          v
  inventory all filesystem changes
          |
          v
  reject commits, denied paths, and out-of-scope paths
          |
          v
  revalidate the real target for drift
          |
          v
  promote only validated changes to the real repository

Required properties:

1. Preserve the approved base commit and all safe pre-existing tracked and
   untracked work needed by the task.
2. Exclude prohibited secret-bearing paths from model context and staging logic.
3. Keep the isolated repository metadata independent so executor commits cannot
   mutate the real repository's object database or refs.
4. Detect changes beyond Git-visible files, including ignored outputs, without
   reading or transmitting prohibited secret contents.
5. Reject every path matching --deny before promotion, even if --allow also
   matches it.
6. Reject every changed path that does not match --allow.
7. Recheck the real repository immediately before promotion; abort if its commit,
   working tree, policy, or approval-bound context has drifted.
8. Apply only validated changes and produce an exact handoff of promoted,
   rejected, and untouched paths.
9. Never automatically discard the isolated workspace when retaining it is
   necessary for diagnosis; report its location and cleanup status safely.

With this design, the human-facing commands should not change. A failed or
out-of-scope execution would leave the real target repository untouched and
report that no changes were promoted.


Open design questions
---------------------

- How to build an isolated workspace portably on macOS and Linux without
  copying or exposing prohibited secret files.
- How to reproduce approved dirty and untracked state without conflating it with
  executor-created changes.
- How to handle symlinks, submodules, nested repositories, file deletions,
  renames, modes, and large binary files during promotion.
- Whether a failed isolated run should always consume approval or permit a
  narrowly defined retry that cannot change task, scope, executor inputs, or
  repository state.
- How long diagnostic workspaces may be retained and how an authorized human
  should remove them.


Checks that remain human-visible
--------------------------------

Until isolated promotion is implemented, always review the repository state and
final diff after execution. Treat a successful scope report as evidence about
Git-visible changes, not proof that every ignored file on the filesystem was
unchanged.
